# Alma Offline Circulation Tool

This tool is a set of PHP scripts that present an interface to a single-table MySQL database, which tracks patrons and items while Alma is down. In short, it is (as named) an offline circulation tool for Alma. It is worth noting that the interface does nothing to protect any of the pages, so it is advisable to restrict access to the server running this offline circulation tool.

While Alma already provides an offline circulation tool, that tool assumes the entire network on your end is down. It generates a file on each and every circulation computer, and every file has to be uploaded individually and in careful order. If one computer checks an item in and another one checks the same item out, collisions occur all the time when Alma is back online. Since many colleges have dependable enough internal networks to at least assume that much of the network is always up, often the offline tool is really only being used because Alma is down on exLibris' end. Therefore, it is often beneficial to utilize the local campus network to centralize these circulation records and not have collisions. This also reduces the number of files that need to be uploaded.

The main interface that circulation desk workers (so all of the staff and student workers checking things in and out) care about is contained in index.php. There is a region of the page for recording patron and item data for check out, and another region for recording item data to check in. The "Add Item" button in each region parses the data, formats it for storage, and adds it to a list at the bottom of the page. The "Submit" button carries the data through a form to the next page, which actually adds the records to the database.

To extract the records, browse to the listrecords.php page. Because records are meant to be modified and exported from here, it would be wise to specify which individuals should access this page to prevent multiple users from colliding in extracting the records. While no records truly get deleted from the database on this page, it is tricky to extract just the records since the last upload once they have been marked. When files are generated, the server will write two files: a regular \*.dat file used for the Alma upload when it is back online and a \*.csv file. The \*.csv file is one of the primary benefits of this tool, as it contains a superset of the \*.dat file's data in a manner that is easy for humans to read.

When uploading to Alma, there will almost certainly be lines it does not like. For each line, add one to the line number[1] and browse to that row in the \*.csv file. Unlike the \*.dat file which only has the faulty barcodes scanned into it, the \*.csv file will have the attached patron names and item titles/call numbers in the same row. This information eases troubleshooting for barcode mismatches, patron id changes, and other problems that Alma likes to complain about when uploading offline records.

## Additional Notes

One thing we learned the hard way from doing this: Alma uploads everything as if it were handled at the location of the person doing the upload. Even though a single file would be the easiest thing to upload, the option to create files by location is there so staff at different locations can upload different files at their own respective locations. If only a single file is uploaded, then anything that belongs at an alternate location is set to be "In Transit" instead of checked in. While mostly an issue for larger libraries with multiple sites, this can technically also be used (if the code is modified accordingly) to track other details like the kind of item, for anyone who feels this is a useful thing to do. The 3 character location code is part of the \*.csv file along with all of the other data exported.



[1] Add one to the number because the \*.dat file immediately starts with data to upload, whereas the \*.csv file uses the first row to describe what each field is.